[Music]
just what he is mathematics is it
substantially different from other
subjects is it just a game or are
mathematicians discovering something
real about the structure of reality
welcome to top cast on the nature of
mathematics the rules of chess are
pretty straightforward once you learn
them the bishop
[Music]
yes the bishop can go as far as you want
but it's restricted to moving diagonally
the rook can also trouble from one end
of the board to the other but only down
columns are along rows the king any
direction at all but it can only move
one square at a time okay okay unless
it's castling these few simple rules
lead nonetheless to a rich array of
possible games in fact the number of
possible games despite being
unimaginably large is in fact a finite
one estimate is that it's around 10 to
the power of 10 to the power of 50 that
aside the rules of chess seemed to be
arbitrary they could have been different
we can imagine that the bishop
[Music]
might have been limited to moving only
two squares rather than the length of
the board or we could imagine a game
where the Queen simply doesn't exist or
that another piece takes the place of
half the pawns the possibilities seem
endless and the game of chess we do have
is simply the result of convention and
tradition is mathematics like this is it
just a self-consistent set of rules that
permit games to be played could we
change the rules and so play a different
game this idea is a relativist one it is
a popular idea and it permeates much of
academia especially among some in the
humanities this is not to say that all
only those and the humanities think this
way certainly some mathematicians
believe they're simply playing games
famously David Hilbert the great German
mathematician who worked on the very
foundations of proof theory probably
thought something like a version of this
idea but he's notable as being an
exception in this regard among
mathematicians and anyway funny as it
may seem a mathematician is in fact not
necessarily the best person to consult
about the nature of mathematics as we
will come to see more and more in the
theory of knowledge course while we
should never rely solely on any
authority a philosopher in this respect
is likely to have a more informed and
considered opinion in particular in this
case a philosopher of mathematics is
this is kind of similar to the way that
a pilot of a 747 might be a highly
competent user of an aircraft and yet
not have a very complete knowledge about
how precisely the wings and engines come
together to allow him to do his job sure
he might have a very good idea but
really it's not essential to his
day-to-day business to know that much
about aeronautical engineering an
aeronautical engineer on the other hand
you get the distinction philosophers of
mathematics in general do seem to be
realist about the nature of mathematics
mathematicians themselves are also
generally realist about their own
subject realism means that there is a
reality out there independent of the
human mind mathematical realism
therefore is the idea that mathematical
entities are also independent of the
human mind
this means mathematics is discovered not
invented relativist philosophers on the
other hand generally all have this in
common truth is a matter of perspective
this is equivalent to the statement
there are no absolute truths this may
cause one to wonder about the truth of
relativism then is relativism true if
it's true then there is at least one
truth that is not a mere matter of
perspective namely relativism but then
why should relativism be privileged
except on dogmatic grounds I'll have
more to say about relativism and the
related theory of post-modernism in a
future talk cast as all such relativist
ideas on the nature of reality can be
similarly seen to collapse when the
foundational self contradiction that
props them up begins to crumble so too
can the relativist view of mathematics
be criticized
[Music]
mathematical truth is not a mere matter
of taste unlike chess the rules cannot
be so easily changed
imagine you wished to change the theorem
that one plus one equals two to become
one plus one equals three can you is it
merely by convention we say one of these
is true and one is not well I mentioned
we did suddenly decide that one plus one
equals three then what well the word
three and the symbol for it would come
to mean what we mean now by two then
what happens to the abstract entity to
which three previously referred well
then we would need a new word and a new
symbol perhaps we could use two perhaps
we could use graham whatever we did
decide to use the entire edifice of the
remainder of our mathematics would
change and it would change in order to
consistently accommodate these changes
and in the end we would have changed
nothing but the symbols it is worthwhile
pointing out here that mathematics works
mathematics is not merely an invention
of the human mind like say the great
trilogy Lord of the Rings because
mathematics enables us to make
predictions and discover new things
if mathematics were a mere invention
then we should not expect it to be so
accurate in the predictions it enables
us to make no work of fiction is able to
predict with anything approaching the
same level of fidelity the things that
mathematics in partnership with science
can the laws of physics are expressed
mathematically and the fact that they
are mathematical in form is not only
somewhat mysterious but also fortuitous
imagine that we wish to calculate
exactly how long it will take for a rock
dropped from a cliff to splash into the
ocean below physics tells us that if we
know just a few things like the height
of the cliff and the force of air
resistance then we can write down a
mathematical formula perform a
calculation and make a prediction with
an extremely high degree of accuracy
if mathematics were simply all made up
and was just a game why should we expect
it to work in
this way it seems that mathematics is
not something we can make up any more
than any other part of reality
mathematics is there to be discovered
and we can be truly right or wrong about
it when we look at something purely
mathematical like say the distribution
of prime numbers we find something quite
surprising the prime numbers are
distributed in a way we do not
completely understand we cannot predict
exactly when among all the natural
numbers the next prime number will pop
up the highest prime number found as at
the end of 2009 has around 13 million
digits what the next one will be no one
yet knows but we do know it's out there
Euclid in 300 BC was able to prove that
there are infinitely many Prime's so the
next highest prime number exists we just
haven't found it yet but in what sense
does it exist well it does not yet exist
in any physical way and so this is why
we say mathematics is about abstract
entities as far as prime numbers go
however it has even been suggested that
communication with only intelligence
could in part be recognized by an
embedding of prime numbers in a radio
signal in other words we should expect
aliens who would speak none of our
terrestrial languages would nonetheless
know the same basic mathematics
especially if they are capable of using
electromagnetic radiation for
communication purposes it turns out it
would not matter if the number system
they used was based ten like ours by
sixty like the Babylonians or based to
like a computer or any other base the
prime numbers are somehow out there to
be discovered and you can express the
same number using any system you like
the prime number then in base 10 we know
as 7 is 0 1 1 1 in binary prime numbers
are not an invention they are a series
of numbers some of which have been
discovered and an infinity more out
there waiting to be discovered
again we come back to the point that
mathematics in general is something that
is discovered not invented there
many flavors of realism which is the
alternative to the relativist position
on mathematics it is worth looking into
for example platonism logis ism and
formalism in more detail but the type of
realism I will discuss is a type of what
is called empiricism but for the sake of
clarity I'm simply going to call it the
realist perspective the idea is this
mathematics is about necessary truth
mathematics is a language yes and the
tool certainly but in the end pure
mathematics is the study of necessary
truth it is important to distinguish
between what are known and philosophy as
contingent truths and necessary truths
and that's what I'll do next so what's
all this about necessary truth well a
necessary truth is one that could not
have been otherwise it is true by virtue
of the meanings of the terms that make
it up for example a triangle has three
sides is a necessary truth the meanings
of the words triangle three and sides in
this sentence mutually define each other
I do not even need to draw the triangle
for you to know the statement is true if
I drew something that was four-sided and
called it a triangle I would be wrong
this reminds me of a joke a philosophy
lecturer of mine once told me if you
call a horse's tail a leg how many legs
would it have
[Music]
[Applause]
well how many legs it would have four
you can call the tower whatever you want
a horse has four legs necessary truths
are like this it is simply not possible
for them to be otherwise without
contradiction all bachelors are
unmarried men if you are in Sydney then
you are not in Melbourne mathematical
truth is like this therefore
mathematical truths are necessary truths
it is necessarily the case that one plus
one equals two it cannot be otherwise so
you can't simply change the rules we can
actually rigorously prove for example
that the theorem one plus one equals two
it actually takes around half a page
using something called peano's axioms of
arithmetic the underlying rules of basic
arithmetic these are things like that
for any number X then X plus 0 equals X
and for any number X if you add 1 then
you get the immediate successor of X and
so on I'll be coming back to what
axiomatic systems are all about in the
next top caste so that's what necessary
truth is truths that cannot possibly be
otherwise and so which entail a
contradiction if you deny them what
about that other sort of truth I
mentioned I called it contingent truth
contingent truth is the truth of all
natural and human sciences it is truth
that could have been otherwise
for example the true statement the earth
is the third planet from the Sun is a
contingent truth you can certainly
imagine a possible world where Venus did
not exist making earth the second planet
from the Sun all about World War two
ended in 1945 again a contingent truth
you might be wrong but there is no
contradiction in saying World War two
ended in 1994 there is nothing about the
definitions of World War two and ended
in 1994 that entail a strict logical
contradiction there might be some
empirical facts that lead to the
statement being false but it is false
based upon knowledge of the physical
world
if one never knew anything else about
world war 2
other than it began in 1939 and ended in
1994 one might go through life with this
falsehood on the other hand one cannot
consistently believe in four sided
triangles so there is a distinction to
be made here between what is a necessary
truth and what is a contingent truth
this distinction it turns out is also
important in considerations about the
existence or otherwise of freewill
Leibnitz one of the inventors of
calculus along with Newton was one of
the greatest philosophers of all time
and was able to solve the problem of
free will in a universe with an
omniscient God that is a God who knows
everything including all of your future
actions whether you believe in an
omniscient God or whether you believe
that the laws of physics ultimately
determine all of your future actions
Leibnitz is able to reconcile these
views with free will and that is
something I'll talk about in a future
talk cast now just because mathematics
is about necessary truth does this make
it certain it turns out we cannot be
certain about mathematical truths this
is because in order to establish
something as mathematical fact we need
to prove it now a proof a mathematical
proof or a purely logical proof is a
process it is a process that usually a
person goes through using pen and paper
or a calculator or their mind I say
usually because some proofs today are
completed entirely by computers whatever
the case a proof is a process in fact it
is a physical process whether the
theorem one is interested in is written
in symbols on paper or it is simply
conceived of in the mind or it appears
on a computer screen or it is calculated
using a machine the process of proof
relies upon some physical system now
machines can malfunction mistakes can be
made on paper and brains can make errors
all of this adds up to say that
mathematical theorems can only ever be
as certain as the proofs used to
establish them and because a proof is
necessarily a physical process it is
going to be subject to the same FAL
ability as our knowledge about any
physical process in short proofs are not
abstractions
they are computations and a computation
always requires a computer and it does
not matter if that computer is made of
silicon or biological neurons this point
of view is not shared by all
mathematicians and philosophers it is
worth looking at alternative points of
view including platonism Platonism is
the idea that mathematical entities
exist in another abstract realm that we
do not have complete access to
importantly the proof process on this
platonic view is generally also regarded
as an abstract process that can be
separated from the physical world and
therefore we can get mathematical
certainty by somehow tapping into the
non material abstract world of platonic
forms using our non material Minds some
other philosophers think this view is
misguided and the confusion stems in
part from confusing the processes of
mathematics with its subject matter
mathematics is about necessary truth the
truths that Mathematics studies are
themselves certain but this does not
mean our knowledge about these truths is
certain as David Deutsch so succinctly
puts it necessary truth is merely the
subject matter of mathematics not the
reward we get for doing it the objective
of mathematics is therefore not
mathematical certainty or even
mathematical truth rather it is
mathematical explanation even in proofs
which do not involve diagrams we must
still use symbols or calculators or our
brains all of these things are physical
objects and so the argument still holds
that is our knowledge of mathematics is
based upon our physical theories about
how physical objects behave for this
reason we can be no more certain about
the truths of mathematics
then we can about how we think physical
objects behave ultimately our confidence
about how physical objects behave is
based upon our scientific theories about
how those physical objects behave
understanding the relationship between
those physical objects and the
mathematical proof we are undertaking
with them be that pen and paper a
computer or a brain tells us how
confident we are entitled to be about
our deductive proofs it is sometimes
assumed at least tacitly that there is a
hierarchy of argument in academic
discourse there are mathematical proofs
that are absolutely certain there are
scientific arguments that while not
absolutely certain are certainly still
very reliable and finally there are
philosophical arguments and they're a
mere matter of taste here I have used a
philosophical argument to establish that
mathematical explanations rely upon our
scientific theories for their veracity
it is simply not true that mathematics
gets us certain truth it's useful it can
be beautiful and elegant and it is
essential in science but it is not
certain really all claims about the
nature of reality and truth are
philosophical philosophical arguments
should be logical and so consistent and
based on as few assumptions as possible
in the end it is a good philosophical
argument that gets us to our
understanding of mathematics of a
subject about necessary theorems whose
truths are established by the physical
process known as proof but are there
limits to the proof process or could we
one day program a computer who'll be
able to prove all of those necessary
true theorems of mathematics well that's
the subject of the next talk cast
[Music]
for resources and links associated with
Tokyo's visit the DA caste website at
www.nimbios.org